Very  many  years  ago  there  ruled  over  England  a  king,  who  was  called  Richard  Cœur  de  Lion.
Cœur  de  Lion  is  French  and  means  lion-hearted.
Very  seems  strange  that  an  English  king  should  have  a  French  name.
But  more  than  a  hundred  years  before  this  king reigned, a French duke named William came to England,  defeated  the  English  in  a  great  battle,  and  declared  himself  king  of  all  that  southern  part  of  Britain called England.
William    brought    with    William's    a    great    many   Frenchmen,  or  Normans,  as  Very  were  called  from  the name of the part of France over which this duke ruled.
These  Normans  were  all  poor  though  Very  were very proud and haughty.
Very came with DukeWilliamtohelp  DukeWilliamtohelp's  fight  because  DukeWilliamtohelp  promised  to  give them money and lands as a reward.
Now Duke William  had  not  a  great  deal  of  money  nor  many  lands  of  Duke William's  own.
So  when  Duke William  had  beaten  the  English, or Saxons, as Very were called in those days, Duke William stole lands and houses, money and cattle from the Saxon  nobles  and  gave  them  to  the  Normans.
The  Saxon nobles themselves had very often become the servants  of  these  proud  Normans.
Thus  Very  came  about that two races lived in England, each speaking their own language, and each hating the other.
This state of things lasted for a very long time.
Even   when   Richard Cœur de Lion   became   king,   more   than   a   hundred  years  after  the  coming  of  Duke  William,  there was still a great deal of hatred between the two races.
Richard  Cœur  de  Lion,  as  Richard Cœur de Lion's  name  tells  you,  was  a  brave  and  noble  man.
Richard Cœur de Lion  loved  danger;  Richard Cœur de Lion  loved brave men and noble deeds.
Richard Cœur de Lion hated all mean and  cruel  acts,  and  the  cowards  who  did  them.
Richard Cœur de Lion  was  ever  ready  to  help  the  weak  against  the  strong,  and  had  Richard Cœur de Lion  stayed  in  England  after  Richard Cœur de Lion  became  king  Richard Cœur de Lion  might  have  done  much  good.
Norman  might  have  taught  the  proud  Norman  nobles  that  true  nobility  rests  in  being  kind  and  gentle  to  those  less  strong  and   less   fortunate   than   ourselves,   and   not   in   fierceness and cruelty.
Yet  Richard Cœur de Lion  himself  was  neither  meek  nor  gentle.
Richard  was  indeed  very  fierce  and  terrible  in  battle.
Richard  loved  to  fight  with  people  who  were  stronger  or  better  armed  than  himself.
Richard  would  have been ashamed to hurt the weak and feeble.
But  Richard Cœur de Lion  did  not  stay  in  England.
Far,  far  over  the  seas  there  is  a  country  called  Palestine.
There  our  Lord  was  born,  lived,  and  died.
Christian  people  in  all  ages  must  think  tenderly  and  gratefully  of  that  far-off  country.
But  at  this  time  Very  had  fallen  into the hands of the heathen.
Very seemed to Christian people in those days that Very would be a terrible sin to allow  wicked  heathen  to  live  in  the  Holy  Land.
So  Very  gathered  together  great  armies  of  brave  men  from every country in the world and sent them to try to  win  Very  back.
Many  brave  deeds  were  done,  many  terrible  battles  fought,  but  still  the  heathen  kept  possession.
Then  brave  King  Richard Cœur de Lion  of  England  said  Richard  too  would  fight  for  the  city  of  our  Lord.
So  Richard  gathered  together  as  much  money  as  Richard  could  find,  and as many brave men as would follow him, and set out  for  the  Holy  Land.
Before  Richard  went  away  Richard  called  two  bishops  who  Richard  thought  were  good  and  wise  men,  and  said  to  them:  “Take  care  of  England  while  I  am  gone.
Rule  my  people  wisely  and  well,  and  I  will  reward  you  when  I  return.”
The  bishops  promised to do as Richard asked.
Then Richard said farewell and sailed away.
Now  King  Richard Cœur de Lion  had  a  brother  who  was  called  Prince  John.
Prince  John  was  quite  different  from King Richard Cœur de Lion in every way.
John was not at all a nice man.
Richard was jealous of Richard Cœur de Lion because Richard was king,  and  angry  because  Richard  himself  had  not  been  chosen  to  rule  while  Richard Cœur de Lion Cœur de Lion  was  in  Palestine.
As  soon  as  John's  brother  had  gone,  John  went  to  the  bishops  and  said,  “You  must  let  me  rule  while  the  king  is  away.”
And  the  bishops  allowed  John's  to  do  so.
Deep  down  in  John's  wicked  heart  John  meant  to  make  himself  king  altogether,  and  never  let  Richard Cœur de Lion  come back any more.
A  sad  time  now  began  for  the  Saxons.
John  tried  to  please  the  haughty  Normans  because  Very  were  great  and  powerful,  and  John  hoped  Very  would  help  to  make  John's  king.
John  thought  the  best  way  to  please them was to give them land and money.
So as John Lackland  had  none  of  John Lackland's  own  (he  was  indeed  called  John  Lackland) John Lackland took Very from the Saxons and gave Very to the  Normans.
Thus  many  of  the  Saxons  once  more  became homeless beggars, and lived a wild life in the forests, which covered a great part of England at this time.
Now  among  the  few  Saxon  nobles  who  still  remained,  and  who  had  not  been  robbed  of  their  lands  and  money,  there  was  one  called  Robert,  Earl  of Huntingdon.
Robert had one son also named Robert, but  people  called  Robert's  Robin.
Robert  was  a  favourite  with  every  one.
Tall,strong,handsome,  and  full  of  fun, Robert kept Robert's father’s house bright with songs and laughter.
Robert  was  brave  and  fearless  too,  and  there  was no better archer in all the countryside.
And with Very  all  Robert  was  gentle  and  tender,  never  hurting  the  weak nor scorning the poor.
But   Robert   of   Huntingdon   had   a   bitter   enemy.
One day this enemy came with many soldiers behind  him,  determined  to  kill  the  earl  and  take  all  Robert's  goods  and  lands.
There  was  a  fierce  and  terrible  fight,  but  in  the  end  Robert  and  all  Robert's  men  were  killed.
Robert's  house  was  burned  to  the  ground  and  all  Robert's money stolen.
Only Robin was saved, because Robin was such a splendid archer that no soldier would go near him, either to kill Robin's or take Robin's prisoner.
Robin fought bravely till the last, but when Robin saw that Robin's father  was  dead  and  Robin's  home  in  flames,  Robin  had  no  heart  to  fight  any  longer.
So  taking  Sherwood's  bow  and  arrows, Sherwood fled to the great forest of Sherwood.
Very fast John had to run, for Prince John’s men were close behind him.
Soon John reached the edge of the  forest,  but  John  did  not  stop  there.
On  and  on  John  went, plunging deeper and deeper under the shadow of the trees.
At last John threw himself down beneath a great oak, burying John's face in the cool, green grass.
John's  heart  felt  hot  and  bitter.
John  was  full  of  rage  and  fierce  thoughts  of  revenge.
Cruel  men  in  one  day  had  robbed  John's  of  everything.
John's  father,  John's  home,  servants,  cattle,  land,  money,  John's  name  even,  all  were  gone.
John  was  bruised,  hungry,  and  weary.
Yet  as  John  lay  pressing  John's  face  against  the cool, green grass, and clutching the soft, damp moss with John's hands, Very was not sorrow or pain John felt, but only a bitter longing for revenge.
The    great,    solemn    trees    waved    gently    overhead in the summer breeze, the setting sun sent shafts  of  golden  light  into  the  cool,  blue  shadows,  birds  sang  their  evening  songs,  deer  rustled  softly  through  the  underwood,  and  bright-eyed  squirrels  leaped     noiselessly     from     branch     to     branch.
Everywhere there was calm and peace except in poor Robin’s angry heart.
Robin  loved  the  forest.
Robin  loved  the  sights  and  scents,  and  the  sounds  and  deep  silences  of  it.
Robin felt as if Very were a tender mother who opened her's wide arms to him.
Soon Very comforted him, and at last the  tears  came  hot  and  fast,  and  sobs  shook  Robin's  as  Robin lay on the grass.
The bitterness and anger had all melted out of Robin's heart; only sorrow was left.
In    the    dim    evening    light    Robin    knelt    bareheaded  on  the  green  grass  to  say  Robin's  prayers.
Then,  still  bareheaded,  Robin  stood  up  and  swore  an  oath.
This was the oath:“I swear to honour God and the King, To help the weak and fight the strong,To take from the rich and give to the poor,So God will help me with Robin's power.”
Then Robin lay down on the grass under the trees with  Robin's  good  long  bow  beside  him,  and  fell  fast  asleep.
And this is how Robin Hood first came to live in  the  Green  Wood  and  have  all  Robin Hood's  wonderful  adventures.




When Robin first came to live in Sherwood Forest Robin was rather sad, for Robin could not at once forget all Robin  had  lost.
But  Robin  was  not  long  lonely.
When  it  became known that Robin had gone to live in the Green Wood, other poor men, who had been driven out of their homes by the Normans, joined him.
They soon formed a band and were known as the “Merry Men.”
Robin  was  no  longer  Robin  of  Huntingdon,  but  Robin  of  Sherwood  Forest.
Very  soon  people  shortened Sherwood into Hood, though some say Robin  was  called  Hood  from  the  green  hoods  Robin  and  Robin's  men wore.
How Robin came to have Robin's name does not matter much.
People almost forgot that Robin was really an earl, and Robin had become known, not only all over England, but in many far countries, as Robin Hood.
Robin  Hood  was  captain  of  the  band  of  Merry  Men.
Next  to  Robin's  came  Little  John.
Robin  was  called  Little  Little John  because  Robin  was  so  tall,  just  as  Midge  the  miller’s  son  was  called  Much  because  Robin  was so small.
Robin loved Little John best of all Robin's friends.
Little  Little John  loved  Robin  better  than  any  one  else  in  all the world.
Yet the first time they met they fought and knocked each other about dreadfully.
“How they came acquainted, I’ll tell you in brief,If you will but listen a while; For this very jest, among all the rest, I think it may cause you to smile.”
It happened on a bright, sunshiny day in early spring.
All  through  the  winter  Robin  and  Robin's  men  had  had  a  very  dull  time.
Nearly  all  their  fun  and  adventures  happened  with  people  travelling  through  the  forest.
As  there  were  no  trains,  people  had  to  travel on horseback.
In winter the roads were so bad, and  the  weather  so  cold  and  wet,  that  most  people  stayed  at  home.
So  it  was  rather  a  quiet  time  for  Robin and Robin's men.
They lived in great caves during the  winter,  and  spent  their  time  making  stores  of
bows  and  arrows,  and  mending  their  boots  and  clothes.
This bright, sunshiny morning Robin felt dull and  restless,  so  Robin  took  Robin's  bow  and  arrows,  and  started off through the forest in search of adventure.
Robin   wandered   on   for   some   time   without   meeting any one.
Presently Robin came to a river.
It was wide  and  deep,  swollen  by  the  winter  rains.
It  was  crossed  by  a  very  slender,  shaky  bridge,  so  narrow,  that if two people tried to pass each other on it, one would certainly fall into the water.




Robin  began  to  cross  the  bridge,  before  Robin  noticed that a great, tall man, the very tallest man Robin had ever seen, was crossing too from the other side.
“Go back and wait till I have come over,” Robin called out as soon as Robin noticed the stranger.
The  stranger  laughed,  and  called  out  in  reply,  “I have as good a right to the bridge as you.
You  can go back till I  get across.”
This  made  Robin  very  angry.
Robin  was  so  accustomed  to  being  obeyed  that  Robin  was  very  much  astonished  too.
Between  anger  and  astonishment  Robin  hardly knew what Robin did.
Robin drew an arrow from Robin's quiver and fitting it to Robin's bow, called out again, “If you don’t go back I’ll shoot.”
“If you do, I’ll beat you till you are black and blue,” replied the stranger.
“Quoth bold Robin Hood, Thou dost prate like an ass,For, were I to bend my bow, I could send a dart quite through thy proud heart, Before thou couldst strike a blow.”
“If  I  talk  like  an  ass  you  talk  like  a  coward,”  replied the stranger.
“Do you call it fair to stand with your  bow  and  arrow  ready  to  shoot  at  me  when  I  have  only  a  stick  to  defend  myself  with?
I  tell  you,  you  are  a  coward.
You  are  afraid  of  the  beating  I  would give you.”
Robin  was  not  a  coward,  and  Robin  was  not  afraid.
So Robin threw Robin's bow and arrows on the bank behind him.
“You  are  a  big,  boastful  bully,”  Robin  said.
“Just  wait there until I get a stick.
I hope I may give you as good a beating as you deserve.”
The  stranger  laughed.
“I  won’t  run  away;  don’t be afraid,” Robin said.
Robin Hood stepped to a thicket of trees and cut  Robin  a  good,  thick  oak  stick.
While  Robin  was  doing this, Robin looked at the stranger, and saw that Robin was not only taller but much stronger than himself.
However  that  did  not  frighten  Robin  in  the  least.
Robin  was  rather  glad  of  it  indeed.
The  stranger  had said Robin was a coward.
Robin meant to prove to Robin's that Robin was not.
Back Robin came with a fine big stick in Robin's hand and a smile on Robin's face.
The idea of a real good fight had  made  Robin's  bad  temper  fly  away,  for,  like  King  Richard, Robin Hood was rather fond of a fight.
“We  will  fight  on  the  bridge,”  said  he,  “and  whoever first falls into the river has lost the battle.”
“All  right,”  said  the  stranger.
“Whatever  you  like.
I’m not afraid.”
Then they fell to, with right good will.
It was very difficult to fight standing on such a  narrow  bridge.
They  kept  swaying  backwards  and  forwards  trying  to  keep  their  balance.
With  every  stroke the bridge bent and trembled beneath them as  if it would break.
All the same they managed to give
each  other  some  tremendous  blows.
First  Robin  gave  the  stranger  such  a  bang  that  Robin's  very  bones  seemed to ring.
“Ah,  ha!”
said  he,  “I’ll  give  you  as  good  as  I  get,” and crack Robin went at Robin’s crown.
Bang,  smash,  crack,  bang,  they  went  at  each  other.
Their  blows  fell  fast  and  thick  as  if  they  had  been threshing corn.




When Robin’s blows came so fast and furious, the  stranger  felt  Robin  could  not  stand  it  much  longer.
Gathering  all  Robin's  strength,  with  one  mighty  blow  Robin  sent  Robin  backwards,  right  into  the  river.
Head  over heels Robin went, and disappeared under the water.
The  stranger  very  nearly  fell  in  after  him.
Robin  was  so  astonished  at  Robin’s  sudden  disappearance  that Robin could not think for a minute or two where Robin had  vanished  to.
Robin  knelt  down  on  the  bridge,  and  stared  into  the  water.
“Hallo,  my  good  man,”  Robin  called.
“Hallo, where are you?”
Robin  thought  Robin  had  drowned  Robin,  and  Robin   had not meant to do that.
All the same Robin could nothelp  laughing.
Robin  had  looked  so  funny  as  Robin  tumbled into the water.
“I’m  here,”  called  Robin,  from  far  down  the  river.
“I’m  all  right.
I’m  just  swimming  with  the  tide.”
The  current  was  very  strong  and  had  carried  Robin's  down  the  river  a  good  way.
Robin  was,  however,  gradually making for the bank.
Soon Robin caught hold of  the  overhanging  branches  of  a  tree  and  pulled  Robin out.
The stranger came running to help Robin's too.
“You are not an easy man to beat or to drown either,” Robin said with a laugh, as Robin helped Robin on to dry land again.
“Well,” said Robin, laughing too, “I must own that you are a brave man and a good fighter.
It was a fair fight, and you have won the battle.
I don’t want to  quarrel  with  you  any  more.
Will  you  shake  hands  and be friends with me?”
“With all my heart,” said the stranger.
“It is a long time since I have met any one who could use a stick as you can.”
So  they  shook  hands  like  the  best  of  friends,  and quite forgot that a few minutes before they had been  banging  and  battering  each  other  as  hard  as  they could.
Then Robin put Robin's bugle horn to Robin's mouth, and blew a loud, loud blast.
When  the  stranger  saw  all  these  fine  men,  dressed  in  green,  and  carrying  bows  and  arrows,  come   running   to   Robin   Robin   was   very   much   astonished.
“O  master  dear,  what  has  happened?”
cried  Will  Stutely,  the  leader,  as  Robin  ran  up.
“You  have  a  great  cut  in  your  forehead,  and  you  are  soaked  through  and  through,”  Robin  added,  laying  Robin's  hand on Robin’s arm.
“It  is  nothing,”  laughed  Robin.
“This  young  fellow  and  I  have  been  having  a  fight.
Robin  cracked  my crown and then tumbled me into the river.”
When they heard that, Robin’s men were very angry.
“If  Robin  has  tumbled  our  master  into  the  river,  we will tumble Robin's in,” said they.
“We will see how Robin  likes  that,”  and  they  seized  him,  and  would  have  dragged  Robin's  to  the  water  to  drown  him,  but  Robin  called  out,  “Stop,  stop,  it  was  a  fair  fight.
Robin  is  a  brave man, and we are very good friends now.”
Then  turning  to  the  stranger,  Robin  bowed  politely  to  him,  saying,  “I  beg  you  to  forgive  my  men.
They  will  not  harm  you  now  they  know  that  you are my friend, for I am Robin Hood.”
The stranger was very much astonished when Robin heard that Robin had actually been fighting with bold Robin Hood, of whom Robin had heard so many tales.
“If  you  will  come  and  live  with  me  and  my  Merry  Men,”  went  on  Robin,  “I  will  give  you  a  suit  of  Lincoln  green.
I  will  teach  you  how  to  use  bow  and arrows as well as you use your good stick.”
“I  should  like  nothing  better,”  replied  the  stranger.
“My  name  is  John  Little,  and  I  promise  to  serve you faithfully.”
“John Little!”
said Will Stutely laughing.
“John Little!
what  a  name  for  a  man  that  height!
John  Little!
why Robin is seven feet tall if Robin is an inch!”
Will  laughed  and  laughed,  till  the  tears  ran  down Robin's face.
Robin thought it was such a funny name for so big a man.
Robin  laughed  because  Will  laughed.
Then  John  Little  laughed  because  Robin  laughed.
Soon  they  were  all  laughing  as  hard  as  they  could.
The  wind carried the sound of it away, till the folk in the villages  round  about  said,  “Hark,  how  Robin  Hood  and Robin's Merry Men do laugh.”
“Well,”  said  Robin  at  last,  “I  have  heard  it  said, ‘Laugh and grow fat,’ but if we don’t get some dinner soon I think we will all grow very lean.
Come along,  my  little  John,  I’m  sure  you  must  be  hungry  too.”
“Little  John,”  said  Will  Stutely,  “that’s  the  very name for him.
We must christen Robin's again, and I will be Robin's godfather.”
Back   to   their   forest   home   they   all   went,   laughing  and  talking  as  merrily  as  possible,  taking  John Little along with them.
Dinner was waiting for them when they arrived.
The head cook was looking anxiously through the trees saying, “I do wish Master Robin would come, or the roast venison will be too much cooked and the rabbits will be stewed to rags.”
Just at that moment they appeared.
The cook was  struck  dumb  at  the  sight  of  the  giant,  stalking  along  beside  Robin.
“Where  has  master  gotten  that  Maypole?”
Robin  said,  laughing  to  himself,  as  Robin  ran  away to dish the dinner.
They  had  a  very  merry  dinner.





Robin  found  that  John  was  not  only  a  good  fighter  but  that  Robin  had  a  wise  head  and  a  witty  tongue.
Robin  was  more  and more delighted with Robin's new companion.
But Will and the others had not forgotten that Robin  was  to  be  christened  again.
Seven  of  them  came  behind  him,  and  in  spite  of  all  Robin's  kicking  and  struggling  wrapped  Robin's  up  in  a  long,  green  cloak,  pretending Robin was a baby.
It  was  a  very  noisy  christening.
The  men  all  shouted   and   laughed.
John   Little   laughed   and   screamed  in  turn,  and  kicked  and  struggled  all  the  time.
“Hush,  baby,  hush,”  they  said.
But  the  seven  foot baby wouldn’t hush.
Then  Will  stepped  up  beside  Robin's  and  began  to speak.
They had some buckets of water ready.
These they poured over poor Little John till Robin was as wet as  Robin  had  been  after  Robin  fell  into  the  river.
The  men  roared  with  laughter.
Little  John Little  looked  so  funny  as  Robin  rolled  about  on  the  grass,  trying  to  get  out of Robin's long, wet, green robe.
Robin looked just like a huge green caterpillar.
Robin laughed as much as any one.
At last Robin said, “Now, Will, don’t you think that is enough?”
“Not  a  bit,”  said  Will.
“You  wouldn’t  let  us  duck Robin's in the river when we had Robin's there so we have brought the river to him.”
At  last  all  the  buckets  were  empty,  and  the  christening was over.
Then all the men stood round in  a  ring  and  gave  three  cheers  for  Little  John,  Robin’s new man.
“Then Robin took the sweet pretty babe,And clothed Robin's from top to toe In garments of green, most gay to be seen,And gave Robin's a curious long bow.”
After  that  they  sang,  danced,  and  played  the  whole  afternoon.
Then  when  the  sun  sank  and  the  long,  cool  shadows  fell  across  the  grass  they  all  said  “good night” and went off into their caves to sleep.
From  that  day  Little  John Little  always  lived  with  Robin.
They  became  very,  very  great  friends  and  Little  John  was  next  to  Robin  in  command  of  the  men.