This very old story begins with Uther, a great king. He was a good man and he was king in the south of Britain. Other places were very dangerous at that time, but people did not fight in  Uther’s  country.  Uther  loved  a  beautiful  woman,  Igraine,  and  he  wanted  to  marry  her.  But she did not love him and he was very sad about that. Merlin was a very clever man and he knew a lot of magic. He could change into an animal  or  bird.  Sometimes,  when  he  used  magic,nobody  could  see  him.He  also  helped  people with his magic, and one day he came to King Uther. ‘You can marry Igraine,’ he said. ‘I will help you. But when you have a child, you will have to give the boy to me.’ ‘I  will  give  him  to  you,’  said  the  King.  He  married  Igraine  and  later  they  had  a  baby  son.  They  called  him  Arthur.  When  Arthur  was  three  days  old,  a  very  old  man  arrived  at  the door of the King’s house. It was Merlin. King Uther took the child in his arms and gave him  to  Merlin.  Merlin  took  the  child  away.  He  gave  the  boy,  Arthur,  to  a  good  knight.  His  name  was  Sir*  Ector.  So  Arthur  lived  with  Sir  Ector  and  his  son,  Kay,  and  the  two  boys  were brothers. A short time after this happened King Uther was very ill. He did not get better. He called for Merlin because he wanted to talk about the future of his country. Merlin came and listened to the King. ‘I know that I am going to die,’ King Uther said. ‘Who will be king after me?’ ‘Call your knights and great men,’ Merlin told the King. ‘Tell them, "My son, Arthur, will be the next king!”‘ King Uther told his people this before he died. But a lot of people wanted to be king, so the knights and great men began to fight. There was no new king for a long time.  When  Arthur  was  a  young  man.  Merlin  went  to  London.  He  visited  the  Archbishop,  the  most important man in the Church. ‘Call the knights to London. Then we will find the new king,’ Merlin told the Archbishop. The knights came to London. They met at a large church, and the Archbishop spoke to them. When they came outside, they saw something strange in front of the church. It was a very large stone with a great sword in it. The sun shone on the sword and it looked very strong. The knights were excited, and started to talk about it. ‘Where did it come from?’ ‘How did it get here?’ ‘Who brought the stone here? We didn’t see anybody. And who put the sword in it?’ On the stone were these words:ONLY THE KING CAN TAKE THE SWORD FROM THE STONE. Every knight tried to pull the sword out of the stone. Nobody could do it — the sword did not come out. The knights pulled and pulled. But they could not move the sword. ‘Our king is not here,’ said the Archbishop. ‘But I know that we will find him.’ Ten knights stayed and watched the stone. The Archbishop invited all the great men in the  country  to  London  for  a  big  fight.  There  were many  big  fights  at  that  time.  People  fought on horses with swords in their hands. The strongest and best knight always won. ‘Perhaps the new king will come to the fight,’ thought the Archbishop. Sir Ector went to the fight with his two sons, Sir Kay and young Arthur. Arthur was now sixteen  years  old.  The  young  men  wanted  to  fight  with  the  other knights,  but  Sir  Kay  did  not have a sword. Arthur was a kind young man. He wanted to help. ‘There is a sword in a stone outside a church. I saw it on the way here. I will get it and fight with it. Then you can have my sword,’ he said to his brother. Arthur left Sir Kay and quickly went to the church. There were no knights outside by the stone because they were at the fight. Arthur climbed down from his horse and went to the stone. He did not read the words on the stone. He took the sword in his hand and pulled. It came out of the stone easily. He  ran  back  to  his  horse  with  the  sword.  Some  minutes  later  he  met  Sir  Kay  and  Sir  Ector again, and he showed them the sword. ‘Where  did  that  sword  come  from?’  Sir  Ector  asked.  He  knew  about  the  words  on  the  stone. They  went  back  to  the  place  outside  the  church,  and  Sir  Ector  put  the  sword  in  the  stone again. ‘Now pull it out,’ he said to Arthur. Arthur pulled it out. It came out as easily as a knife out of butter. Sir Ector saw this and took Arthur’s hand. ‘You are my king,’ he said. Arthur  did  not  understand.  What  did  his  father  mean?  ‘Arthur,’  Sir  Ector  said  slowly,  ‘I  love  you  very  much,  but  I  am  not  really  your  father.  Merlin,  the  famous  man  of  magic,  brought  you  to  me  when  you  were  a  small  child.  I  took  you  into  my  family  because  he  asked me. Now I know that you are the king.’I will try to be a good king,’ said Arthur. ‘And I will listen to your words, because you are my father. Sir Kay, my brother, you will be an important knight and a friend to me.’ Then  they  went  to  the  Archbishop  and  told him  everything.  The  knights  were  angry.  They did not think that Arthur was really the king. So the Archbishop called all the knights to the stone. Arthur put the sword back into the stone. Every knight tried again to take it out, but it did not move. Then they watched and Arthur pulled it out easily. Everybody shouted, ‘Arthur is our king! Arthur is our king!’ Many people came to see Arthur. They were all happy because now they had a kind, good king. He was strong and he was not afraid. Merlin told Arthur the story of his parents. ‘Your father was King Uther and your mother was Queen Igraine. When you were a baby, I took you to Avalon, a magic place. You were born with magic in your life. You will be the best knight and you will be the greatest king. You will live for a very long time.’ So King Arthur began a new life. He took his horse and went through the country with his knights. Sometimes they had to fight bad men but they were not afraid. Arthur was a good king, and his knights were brave. His country was a quiet place again.




King  Arthur  went  to  the  north  and  the  east  with  his  knights  and  fought  the  Saxons.  Then  they  came  back  and  stopped  in  the  town  of  Camelot.  Arthur  made  it  the  most  important  town in the country. It was now his home, and the home of his brave knights. One day King Arthur visited his friend, King Leodegraunce. He had a daughter and she was the most beautiful woman in England. The daughter’s name was Guinevere. When he went back to Camelot, Arthur could not stop thinking about her. ‘I love Guinevere and I want to marry her,’Arthur told Merlin. King Leodegraunce was very happy. Arthur was a good and brave man — a good husband for his lovely daughter. So Arthur and Guinevere went to church and the Archbishop married them. Everybody enjoyed a wonderful party in Camelot. Then Merlin made a large round table for King Arthur’s knights in Camelot. There were 150  places  at  the  great  wood  and  stone  table. King  Arthur  gave  his  best  and  bravest  knights  a  place  at  the  Round  Table.  Each  knight  had  his  place  at  the  table,  but  no  chair  was  better  than  another  chair.  Nobody  sat  at  the  top  of  a  round  table  and  nobody  sat  at  the bottom. ‘The names of the Knights of the Round Table will be famous!’ cried Merlin.  Some  knights  died  and  other  brave  and  good  knights  came  to  Camelot.  One  day  a  new  knight, Sir Pellinore, arrived at Camelot, and Arthur gave him a place at the Round Table. For a long time there was one place with no knight. Merlin could see into the future. ‘Only a good knight, your best knight, will sit there,’ Merlin told King Arthur. ‘The place is for your best knight, and he will come to it.’ After many years Sir Galahad came and sat in that place at the Round Table.




King Arthur went round the country on his horse. He met his people and helped them. One day he came to a great wood. When evening came, King Arthur was not out of the wood. Then he saw a very big, beautiful castle in front of him. He went nearer, and the great door of the castle opened. A woman came out. ‘King Arthur,’ she said. ‘I am Queen Annoure. Stay in my castle. It is getting dark. I will give you food and a bed for the night.’ Arthur  was  hungry  and  thirsty.  He  was  also  tired.  He  looked  at  the  dark  sky.  ‘Thank  you,’ he said, and he went in. The Queen was kind to Arthur. She took his horse and gave it food and water. She took Arthur to the dining-room of her castle and gave him bread,meat  and  wine.  Then  one  of  Queen Annoure’s men took the King to his bedroom, and Arthur went to sleep.The next morning, after breakfast, Queen Annoure wanted to see Arthur. ‘I  would  like  to  show  you  my  castle  and  the  beautiful  things  in  it,’  she  said.  ‘I  am  the  richest person in the world. Look — everything here is mine.’ Arthur  looked  at  her  castle.  They  went  from room  to  room,  and  each  room  was  richer  than the room before that. There were beautiful things everywhere. Queen Annoure knew a lot of magic, so she could make beautiful things. Then they came out on to the top of the castle. ‘Look at those beautiful trees and gardens,’ said the Queen. ‘And look at those woods. They are mine too. This is my country. And can you see that great wall round the castle? Stay with me and be king here! You cannot leave. The door of the castle is shut, and that great wall will stop you. My men are ready. Do not leave,or they will kill you.’ ‘Your magic cannot hurt me, and your men cannot kill me,’ answered King Arthur. Then,  with  his  sword  in  his  hand  and  his  helmet  on  his  head,  Arthur went  out  of  the  castle, and through the door in the great wall. Nobody could stop him. Queen Annoure sent one of her men to Sir Pellinore. He lived near her castle, and he had a place at King Arthur’s Round Table. ‘Queen Annoure says that a very bad knight is on his way to her castle. He wants to kill her and take her money. He is very near here,and he will go past your house. Please go out and fight him for my queen,’ the man said to Sir Pellinore. So  Pellinore  sat  on  his  horse  and  waited.  He  did  not  know that  King  Arthur  was  the  ‘very bad knight’. Arthur met Pellinore on the road. ‘Sir! Knight!’ cried Arthur. ‘Why are you waiting here? Do you want to fight me?’ ‘Yes!’ shouted Sir Pellinore, and he took his sword in his hand. Pellinore hit the King with his sword and Arthur fell from his horse. He stood up. He was very  angry  and  pulled  out  his  sword.  They  had  a  long  fight,  and  then  the  King’s  sword  broke. ‘Ha!’ cried Sir Pellinore. ‘That is the end of the fight! I can kill you now!’ Arthur  threw  down  his  sword.  He  ran  at  Sir  Pellinore  and  threw  him  on  to  the  ground.  The two men were very tired, but they fought for a little longer. Then Arthur put his foot on Pellinore’s head. Arthur took the helmet from his head, so Pellinore could see his face. ‘Shall I kill you? ‘ Arthur said. Pellinore looked up and saw Arthur’s face. ‘My King!’ he cried. ‘I did notknow it was you! Queen Annoure wanted me to fight a bad knight on this road.’ ‘I am not that bad knight! But I know you did not want to kill your king,’ said King Arthur. Then the two men were friends again. Sir Pellinore hurt King Arthur in the fight, so Merlin visited Arthur. In three days Arthur was well again. ‘My sword broke in the fight,’ Arthur told Merlin. ‘That sword was not important,’ said Merlin. ‘ Come with me and you will find the best sword in the world. It is a magic sword from Avalon, the place of magic.’ The  King  went  with  Merlin  through  a  dark  wood.The  trees  shut  out  the  light  from  the  sun and Arthur could not see the sky. After a long time they came to an open place in the mountains. There were no trees, but Arthur saw a strange lake. The water was very blue and there were flowers next to it. ‘Now go to the lake,’ Merlin told Arthur. So Arthur left his horse with Merlin and walked down to the magic lake. He looked across the quiet blue water - and there, in the centre of the lake, he suddenly saw an arm with a beautiful sword in its hand. ‘Go and take it,’ said Merlin. ‘It is the sword Excalibur. The Lady of the Lake made it for you. She lives in her home in the water of the lake.’ A lovely young woman walked across the water and stood on the ground next to King Arthur. ‘I am the Lady of the Lake. Your sword, Excalibur, is waiting for you.’ There  was  a  boat  on  the  water.King  Arthur  got  into  it  and  went  to  the  middle  of  the  lake.  He  took  the  sword,  and  the  arm  went  into  the  water.  When  Arthur  came  back  to  Merlin, the Lady of the Lake was not there. The sword was inside a scabbard. It was a very beautiful thing. ‘That  is  a  magic  scabbard,’  said Merlin.  ‘No  man  can  kill  a  person  with  that  scabbard.  Have  it  with  you  always,  because  an  evil  woman  will  try  to  take  the  scabbard  and  the  sword away from you.’ King Arthur and Merlin went home again. Arthur’s knights listened happily to the stories of his journey.




Morgan  le  Fay  was  a  queen,  with  a  castle  in  the  country  of  Gorres.She  was  a  very  bad  woman. She could do magic, but she only used her magic for bad things. King Arthur did not know that Morgan le Fay hated him. She wanted King Arthur to die. ‘She is a kind friend,’ thought King Arthur. He did not know about her evil plans. One day he went out on his horse to the woods. He wanted to catch animals, so he did not take his sword. He left Excalibur with Queen Morgan le Fay at her castle. ‘I will come and get it on my way home,’ he told her. Arthur  went  on  his  horse  in  front of his men. He went a  long  way  into  the  dark  woods  and then he could not find the way out again. When night came, he could not see his men anywhere. Arthur came to a lake. Then he saw a small light on the lake and he moved nearer and nearer to it. The light was in a beautiful ship. ‘I will go onto the ship,’ thought Arthur. When he was inside, he saw food and drink on the table and a bed. But he could not see anybody there. It  was  late  and  King  Arthur  was  tired.  ‘I will  stay  here  tonight,’  he  thought.  ‘In  the  morning I will find my way out of the woods. Then I will get Excalibur, and go home.’ So he late a good dinner on the ship and then he went to sleep. But when he woke up in the morning, he was not in the ship. He was in a little room with a very small window. He did  not  know  this  place.  The  door  was  shut,  so  he  could  not  get  out.  There  were  three  knights in the room. ‘This is the castle of Sir Damas. He is a very evil knight. He caught us too, and put us here,’  one  of  the  knights  told  Arthur.  Sir  Damas  wants  us  to  fight  for  him.  Then  we  can  leave the castle. Or we will stay here and die.’ Some men came and took Arthur into a great room. Sir Damas was there. ‘Will  you  fight  for  me?’  Sir  Damas  asked.  ‘That  is  a  difficult  question.  Sir  Damas,’  answered King Arthur. ‘I will fight for you. But when I win, I want those three knights. Then we will all leave your castle.’ ‘Yes,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘Fight for me and you can take the three knights with you.’ ‘I will have to have a horse and a sword,’ King Arthur said. Then a man came into the room. He brought a sword and gave it to Arthur. ‘This sword is from Queen Morgan le Fay. It is for you. King Arthur. You left it with her and she heard about your fight today. She wants you to have Excalibur,’ said the man. King  Arthur  looked  at  the  sword.  ‘Yes,  this is  Excalibur,’  he  thought  happily.  No  man  could kill him when he had the magic scabbard. Sir Damas gave him food and drink and he got ready for the fight. When Arthur was ready, he went outside. He saw another knight there, but he did not know him. He could not see the knight’s face behind his helmet. ‘Who  is  this  knight?  Which  castle  does  he come  from?  Which  king sent  him?’  thought Arthur. The other knight also did not know King Arthur under his helmet. The fight began. King Arthur was not happy. He could not hurt the other knight with his sword, because the sword was not Excalibur! It was a sword from Morgan le Fay’s magic. It looked the same as Excalibur, but it was different. When the other knight hit Arthur with his sword, it hurt him. Arthur felt very weak. ‘His sword is very strong,’ thought Arthur. King  Arthur  was  very  brave  and  he  did not  stop  fighting.  Many  people  came  and watched the fight. But then Arthur’s sword broke. He fell onto the ground. ‘Sir!’ the other knight cried.’ Say that I am the winner! Then I will not kill you!’‘No!’ cried Arthur. ‘I will fight - and fight.’King Arthur took the end of his sword. He hit the knight on the head as hard as he could with  it.  The  knight  fell  back  and  hit  the  ground. His  sword  fell  from  his  hand,  and  Arthur quickly took it. When he felt the sword in his hand, he knew. It was Excalibur!Then Arthur saw his scabbard next to the knight. He jumped up and took that too.‘Tell me — who are you? What is your name?’ asked Arthur.The knight stood up and answered, ‘I am Sir Accolon, Knight of the Round Table. I am one of King Arthur’s knights.’‘Tell me — why did you fight me, your king?’ ‘Sir, I did not know you. I came here because Queen Morgan le Fay sent me. She said to  me,  “King  Arthur  is  in  the  castle  of Sir  Damas.  You  have  to  go  and  fight  Sir  Damas. Then he will not kill your king.” Now I know that you are not Sir Damas. I am very sorry,’ said Sir Accolon. ‘And who gave you that sword?’ asked Arthur. ‘Queen Morgan le Fay gave it to me. She said, “Here is King Arthur’s sword, Excalibur,and its scabbard. Take them for the fight. Then you will fight well and your king can leave the castle of that evil knight, Sir Damas.”‘King Arthur was very angry when he heard Accolon’s story. ‘I know now that you did not want to kill me. Sir Accolon. You are a brave knight. Now I understand Morgan le Fay’s evil plan. I had a conversation with Merlin, the man of good magic. I have to be careful with my sword and scabbard, he said. But I did not listen.’ King  Arthur  went  back  to  Sir  Damas  s  castle  with  Sir  Accolon,  and  they  found  the  three knights. There was a great fight with Sir Damas, arid King Arthur won with Excalibur. But after the fight he had a lot of wounds. ‘Bring Sir Damas to me!‘ said the King. Sir Damas came to King Arthur. ‘Why did you want me to fight for you? Why did I have to fight Sir Accolon, one of my knights?‘ King Arthur asked him. ‘Because Queen Morgan le Fay wanted it,’ answered Sir Damas. ‘You  are  not  a  brave  man,’  said Arthur,  ‘and  now  you  will  not  be  a  knight.  I  am  taking your castle from you, and everything in it. I am going to give it to your younger brother.’Then King Arthur left. He did not go to Camelot because he wanted to get well first. Morgan le Fay went to stay at Camelot, and King Arthur was not there. ‘King  Arthur  is  dead  now!‘  she  thought.  But then  her  men  came  to  Camelot,  and  they told her about the fight. ‘King Arthur did not die in the fight,’ they said.Morgan  le  Fay  went  to  Queen  Guinevere  and  said,  ‘I  have  to  go  back  to  my  country now. My people want me there.’Queen Guinevere knew nothing about Morgan le Fay’s magic and her evil ideas.‘Don’t go,’ she answered. ‘The King is coming back to Camelot. I think he will be here tomorrow or the next day. He will be happy when he sees you.’‘No! No!‘ said Morgan le Fay.‘I cannot stay — I have to go.’And so she left Camelot on her black horse. Morgan  le  Fay  and  her  black  horse  did  not  stop  that  day  or  that  night.  When  she  met people on her journey, she asked them: ‘Where is King Arthur? Tell me, where is the King?’After a long time she heard about him. ‘The  King  is  ill,’  a  man  told  her.  ‘He  fought  a  knight  at  Sir  Damas’s  castle.  The  knight wounded King Arthur, so he cannot go back to Camelot. He is staying with the nuns. They are good women, and he will get better there with their help.’The nuns worked for the church and helped people. They were very kind and lived in a large, quiet house. People could stay there when they wanted their help.Morgan le Fay said thank you to the man and went to visit the nuns.‘I  am  on  a  long  journey,  and  I  am  hungry and  thirsty,’  she  said.  ‘Please  can  I  eat something?’The nuns brought food and drink and gave it to Morgan le Fay.‘Is there another visitor here?‘ she asked.‘Yes,’ the nuns said. ‘King Arthur is here. A knight’s sword wounded him in a fight. He will  leave  when  his  wounds  are  better.  He  is sleeping.  You  can  speak  to  him  when  hewakes up.’‘Oh!  The  King!‘  Morgan  le  Fay  cried.  ‘I  can not  wait  because  I  have  to  go  home.  But please, can I look at him? I love our king and I would like to see him!’‘We cannot wake up the King! He is in his bed and he is ill,’ said one of the nuns.‘Please, let me sit next to him for a minute or two. I want to see his face!‘ asked Morganle Fay again.The nun thought about it. ‘Yes, all right. You can go and look at him. But do not make any noise. Do not wake him up.’Morgan  le  Fay  went  into  King  Arthur’s  room. She stood next to him and watched him.The  King  was  asleep,  but  he  had  his  hand  on  Excalibur.  She  could  not  take  the  sword away because she did not want to wake him.Then she saw the scabbard at the end of the bed. Quickly she took it and put it under her clothes. Nobody could see it there. She went out of the room and said thank you and goodbye to the nuns. Then Morgan le Fay got on her black horse and left. Later, when King Arthur opened his eyes, he could not see the scabbard.‘Something is wrong,’ he thought. ‘Where is the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur?’He  was  very  angry  and  called  a  nun.  ‘Did  any body  come  into  this  room  when  I  was asleep?‘ he asked her.‘Queen  Morgan  le  Fay  came,’  she  said.  ’But  no  other  person.  She  could  not  stay,  but she came into the room. She loves you and she wanted to see your face.’‘Thank you,’ said the King. ‘Thank you for your help. I came here to your house when I was ill. You were kind and good to me. My wounds are getting better.But I have to go now— it is important! I have to follow Queen Morganle Fay. When she visited me in my room,she took the scabbard of my sword, Excalibur.’The  nuns  did  not  want  him  to  leave  because  he  was  not  ready.  But  they  helped  himonto his horse, and he left their house. King Arthur did not stop for hours. Then he cameto a river. There was a man there with his animals. ‘Did anybody come this way?‘ asked the King. ‘Yes,’ answered the man. ‘A beautiful woman came on a black horse. She went across the river here very quickly and did not stop.’ King  Arthur  went  over  the  river,  through  woods  and  up  a  mountain.  Then  he  looked  down, and he saw Morgan le Fay a long way away. Morgan  le  Fay  looked  back  and  she  saw  the  King.  The  ground  was  hard  and  there  were  a  lot  of  stones.  She  went  across  the  stones  and  arrived  at  a  lake.  The  lake  was  black. No animal drank the water. No birds sang in the trees. Queen  Morgan  le  Fay  got  off  her  black  horse  and  took  out  the  scabbard  of  King  Arthur’s sword, Excalibur. She threw it into the water. ‘King  Arthur  will  never  have  it!’  she  cried.  ‘That  scabbard  will  not  help  him  now  when  men fight him. Nobody will find it here — at the bottom of this lake!‘ Then she quickly went away on her horse, back to her castle. King Arthur followed Morgan le Fay and came to the same place. He could not see the Queen. ‘Which way did she go?’ King Arthur thought. ‘Where did the horse go? I cannot follow the horse’s feet across these stones.’ King Arthur looked and looked. He saw nothing, so he went home to Camelot without his scabbard. King  Arthur  had  Excalibur.  But  because  of  the  evil  Queen,  he  did  not  have  the  magic  scabbard. It stayed at the bottom of the black lake and he never found it.




When King Arthur was a young man, Merlin, the man of magic  helped  him  in  every  way.  He  taught  him  to  be  a  good  king  and  a  brave  knight.  Merlin  helped  Arthur  to  be  kind  to  everybody in his country, so they all loved him. With Merlin’s help, Arthur built the beautiful city, Camelot. Camelot had roads and houses and a great castle. Later, when Merlin was an old man,he came to King Arthur again. ‘I have to say goodbye now,’ said Merlin. ‘Goodbye? Why, Merlin?‘ asked King Arthur. ‘I am going to die,’ Merlin told him. ‘I will not always be here. In the future, when you make mistakes, my magic will not help you.’‘Oh Merlin!‘ said King Arthur sadly. ‘I do not want you to go!’‘I am going down into a dark cave, and I cannot come back from that cave.’‘But Merlin,’ King Arthur cried, ‘you know a lot of magic. Can you not stop this? Do you have to die?’‘I cannot stop it,’ answered Merlin. ‘You have to be a strong king without me now!‘After Merlin spoke to King Arthur, Lady Vivien came to Camelot. Before this time, she lived with  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.  The  Lady  of  the Lake  made  Excalibur  and  she  knew  a  lot  of magic.Vivien learned magic from the Lady of the Lake. Then she went to Camelot and studied with Merlin. When she knew all Merlin’s magic, she thought, ‘He is an old man. I cannot kill him because his magic is strong. But I can send him away somewhere so he cannot come back. Then I will have the greatest and strongest magic in the world.’Vivien went on a long journey with Merlin to another country. They climbed a high grey mountain and came to a dark place with a lot of trees and a small river. There they saw a magic cave inside the mountain. ‘The  mouth  of  the  cave  is  open  now,’  said  Merlin  to  Vivien.  ‘When  you  say  the  magic words, the mouth of the cave will shut.’‘I know these magic words. But which words will open it again?‘ asked Vivien. ‘I do not know,’ said Merlin. ‘I want to look inside the cave,’ Vivien said. ‘Please come with me. Show me the way.’So  Merlin  went  into  the  cave  first,  but  Vivien  ran  out  quickly. She  shouted  the  magic words, and the mouth of the cave shut loudly. Merlin was inside and could not get out. Some people say that the great Merlin is there now, inside the cave. One day, they say,somebody will break open the big stone door of the cave. Then Merlin will come out again and  help  the  world  with  his  magic.  He  will,  they  say,  teach  everybody  to  be  good  and happy. But after that sad day, King Arthur had no help from his friend, Merlin.




It  was  the  month  of  May.  The  weather  was  warm  and  the  sky  was  blue.  The  flowers looked very beautiful in the sun. Queen Guinevere called her ten knights and her ladies and said, ‘Let’s enjoy this  beautiful day. We can look for some lovely spring flowers. Let’s take some food and drink and have a party in the wood.’So Guinevere left the castle with her knights and her ladies. Some boys from the castle went with them and carried their things. All day they enjoyed the sun. In the afternoon they sat under the tall green trees. They ate and they talked. Then evening came.‘Now let’s go home,’ the Queen said. ‘King Arthur is waiting for us at Camelot.’They  were  all  ready  when  suddenly  twenty  men  with  swords  and  helmets  jumped  out from the trees.‘Stand there and do not move!’ one of the men shouted. ‘Or we will kill you all!’It was Sir Meligrance, with his men. He loved Queen Guinevere and he wanted to take her to his castle.‘I love you,’ he said, ’and you are here without the King!’ ‘Sir Meligrance,’ cried the Queen. ‘King Arthur made you a Knight of the Round Table!A knight has to be a good man. How can you take away your king’s wife?’ ‘I only know that I love you. My men will help me. They will fight your knights,’ answered Sir Meligrance. Guinevere’s ten knights turned to Sir Meligrance. ‘We will not stand here when you take our queen away, Sir! We will stop you.’Sir  Meligrance  and  his  men  had  better  swords and  helmets  than  Guinevere’s  knights.His men were ready — Guinevere’s men were only there for the flowers. The  tight  began.  Guinevere’s  knights  were  brave  and  fought  hard.  But  they  could  not win. Sir Meligrance’s men were too strong for them. And there were twenty of them. They wounded all Guinevere’s good knights in the fight.‘Stop!’  cried  Guinevere  to  her knights.  ‘Or  they  will  kill  you.’  She  looked  at  Sir Meligrance. ‘All right. Sir Meligrance. I will come with you.’She  was  very  angry  and  afraid.  ‘Come  with  me, my  brave  knights,  to  Sir  Meligrance’s castle.’So  Queen  Guinevere  and  her  people  went  to  the  castle,  but  first  the  Queen  spoke  to one of the boys. ‘You have a good, fast horse,’ she said to him quietly. ‘Go quickly to Camelot! Tell the King and Sir Lancelot!‘Sir Meligrance saw the boy when he left, but his men could not catch him. The boy arrived at Camelot and saw Sir Lancelot. Sir Lancelot was the strongest of King Arthur’s knights. When he heard the story, Lancelot quickly put his helmet on his head and took his sword. ‘I  will  go  now  to  Sir  Meligrance’s  castle  and find  the  Queen,’  said  Sir  Lancelot  to  the  boy. ‘Go and tell the King.’When Lancelot came near the castle, he thought, ‘Sir Meligrance’s men will wait next to the road. They will come out when I go past. So I will not take the road - I will go through the wood.’Lancelot  was  right.  Sir  Meligrance’s  men  waited  by  the  road,  but  they  did  not  see  the knight. Sir  Meligrance  saw  Lancelot  outside  the  castle.  His  men  were  by  the  road,  and suddenly he was afraid. Lancelot was brave and strong. He could fight Sir Meligrance and win. So  Sir  Meligrance  went  to  Queen  Guinevere  and  said,  ‘Oh,  my  Queen,  I  am  sorry! Please  say  you  are  not  angry  with  me.  I  will  take  you  back  to  Camelot  and  I  will  fight  for King Arthur. I want to be a good knight.’The  Queen  did  not  know  about Lancelot  and  Sir  Meligrance’s  men  so  she  answered, ‘Yes, you are sorry. I can see that. I will not be angry with you.’ When Lancelot arrived at the castle, Guinevere told him, ‘I am not angry with Meligrance now. Let’s stay here tonight and we will go back to Camelot tomorrow morning.’Sir Lancelot was very angry and Sir Meligrance knew it. ‘Sir Lancelot will kill me when the Queen leaves this castle,’ he thought. They  ate  in  the  castle’s  great  dining-room.  When  they  finished  dinner.  Sir  Meligrance said to Lancelot, ‘I will take you to your room and you can sleep.’ He showed Lancelot into a room with a door in the floor. Sir Lancelot put his foot on the door  and  it  opened.  He  fell  into a  little  room  below  the  door and  he  could  not  climb  up again. Sir Meligrance went to the Queen. ‘Sir Lancelot did not want to stay here. He went back to Camelot,’ he told her. The  next  day  Queen  Guinevere went  back  to  Camelot  with  Sir  Meligrance.  When  they arrived, they saw King Arthur. ‘Your  knights  are  saying  that  Sir  Meligrance  took  you  away  to  his  castle,’  said  King Arthur. ‘Yes,’  Queen  Guinevere  told King  Arthur.  ‘Meligrance  took me  to  his  castle  and  my knights fought for me. But Meligrance had a lot of men and they were too strong for us. But he is sorry, so I am not angry with him now.’‘Tell me, Sir Meligrance,’ Arthur asked. ‘Are the Queens knights right? What happened when you met Queen Guinevere in the wood with her knights and ladies?’Sir Meligrance answered, ‘I did not take the Queen away. King Arthur. She came with me because she loves me.’The King was very angry with Sir Meligrance. A  girl  in  Sir  Meligrance’s  castle  carried  food  to  Sir  Lancelot  every  day.  She  liked  him,  because  he  was  strong  and  brave.  So  when  Sir  Meligrance  took  Guinevere  to  Camelot,  the  girl  opened  the  door  in  the  floor.  Sir  Lancelot  left  the  room  and  went  quickly  back  to  King Arthur’s castle. The  King  was  with  the  Queen  and  his  knights  in  the  great  dining-room  when  Sir  Lancelot  came  in.  He  saw  Sir  Meligrance  there  and  was  angry.  He  looked  at  Sir  Meligrance. ‘You took away Queen Guinevere to your castle,’ cried Sir Lancelot. ‘She is not angry with you now, so I will not kill you for that. But now you say that she loves you. For this I will kill you! I am the strongest of King Arthur’s knights, so I will fight you without a helmet. But I will win!’ Sir Meligrance quickly moved closer to Sir Lancelot. He hit the other knight’s head with his sword because he had no helmet. But Lancelot jumped away and cut Sir Meligrance’s  helmet in two. And Sir Meligrance fell to the ground - dead.




One day the King of Lyonesse went into the woods because he wanted to catch animals. He  made  a  long  journey  and  at  the  end  of  the  day  he  could  not  find  the  road  home.  His  queen waited in their castle, but he did not come back. ‘Where is the King?’ she thought. ‘He knows that I am going to have a child.’ So the Queen went out into the woods and looked for the King. She walked a long way and  began  to  feel  very  tired.  In  the  evening  she  slept  under  a  tree.  There  her  baby  boy  was born. ‘I am going to die,’ she thought. ‘I am very ill.’ She took the baby in her arms. ‘Oh, my little son,’ cried the Queen. ‘I will give you the name Tristram. It means "sad", and I am sad. I know I am not going to live. But you, my dear child, will be a brave knight when you are a man.’ The King found a way back to his castle, but the Queen was not there. His men went into the woods and looked for her. They found the Queen and the child under a tree and took them back to the castle. The Queen told the King the baby’sname — and then she died. For many days the King did not speak or eat. ‘He will die too,’ people said, ’and the little boy Tristram will be our king.’ But after a long time the King began to enjoy life again. Seven years later the King of Lyonesse married again, and the new queen had a son. She loved her son very much, but she did not like  Tristram, the son of her husband’s first wife. One  day  the  Queen  thought  of a  plan.  She  made  a  drink  for  Tristram  and  put  some  poison in it. ‘He  will  think  it  is  wine,’  she  thought.  ‘But  when  he  drinks  it,  he  will  die.’  She  put  the  glass on the table, ready for Tristram. ‘Everything is ready,’ she thought. ‘Good!’ But  the  Queen’s  son  came  into  the  room  before  Tristram.  He  was  very  thirsty  and  he  drank from the glass. Then he fell on the floor and died. The  Queen  tried  to  kill  Tristram  a  second  time.  Again  she  put  some  poison  into  his  drink.  She  put  the  glass  on  the  table  and  again  waited  for  Tristram.  This  time  the  King  came into the room. He put his hand out to the glass of wine, but the Queen cried, ‘Do not drink it!’ The  King  suddenly  remembered  his  second  son.There  was  poison  in his  drink!  Then  he understood the Queen’s evil plan. ‘You wanted to kill Tristram, but your son drank the poison! So you tried to kill Tristram again,  but  I  nearly  drank  it!’  The  King  was  very  angry.  ‘Make  a  fire!  Take  the  Queen  and  put her in it!’ he shouted to his men. But  when  the  fire  was  ready,  Tristram  came  to his  father.  He  fell  down  at  his  father’s  feet. ‘Father, do not do this! Take your wife back. Love her, and she will love you. She hates me - so send me away. Then you will be happy again.’ So Tristram went to live with his father’s brother, Mark. Mark was King of Cornwall. He loved Tristram and Tristram loved his uncle. He was happy there. When he arrived there, Tristram was a boy. Some years later, he was a strong, brave man. The  King  of  Ireland  also  had  a  son.  Sir  Marhaus.  Nobody  could  fight  him  and  win.  One  day, Sir Marhaus came across the sea to King Mark’s castle. ‘I am the best and strongest knight in Ireland! Send a knight to me and I will fight him. Then you will see!’ Not one of King Mark’s knights wanted to fight Sir Marhaus. Then Tristram went to his uncle and said, ‘I am not a boy now - I am a man. Make me a knight and send me. I can fight Sir Marhaus and win.’ King Mark thought for a long time. ‘I do not want to send you, but the other knights will not fight him,’ he said. So  the  King  made  his  brother’s son,  Tristram,  a  knight  and  Tristram  got  ready  for  the  fight. Many people came and watched the two men. They fought with their swords all day. Sir Marhaus was strong, but he was older than Sir Tristram. He was not as quick on his feet. He could not hit Tristram. The sun was hot, and Sir Marhaus started to feel tired. Tristram’s sword cut through Sir Marhaus’s helmet and killed him. His men took the dead man away to his ship. Sir Marhaus also wounded Tristram badly in the fight, and the young man was very ill. There was poison in the wound. Nobody could make Sir Tristram’s wound better. After some time, an old woman came and looked at it. She said, ‘Ah! The poison in this wound came from Ireland. Send your knight there and somebody will make him better.’ So  King  Mark  sent  Sir  Tristram  in  a  ship  to  Ireland.  Sir  Tristram  used  another  name  because he killed the son of the King of Ireland. On  the  ship  Sir  Tristram  looked  out  at  the  green  sea  water. Birds  flew  in  the  sky.  He  took his harp and began to play a song. He played the harp very beautifully. When his ship came near Ireland, the King heard the sound of the music. He asked Tristram to his castle, because he wanted his daughter to play the harp. ‘Where did you get that wound?’the King of Ireland asked. ‘Some  bad  men  fought  me  on  my  journey,’  said  Tristram.  He  could  not  tell  the  King  about his fight with Sir Marhaus. ‘I will ask my daughter, Isolt, to make your wound better. Then will you teach her to play the harp?’ ‘Yes, Sir,’ said Tristram. The King told his daughter about his idea. ‘I will be a good student. Father,’ said Isolt.She  carefully  cleaned  the  wound  and  stayed  near  Tristram’s  bed  for  many  days  and  nights. Then, when he was well again, Tristram taught Isolt the harp. She enjoyed playing it and learned well. They were very happy. Tristram liked Isolt very much and she liked him too. Isolt  knew  another  knight.  His  name  was  Sir  Palamides.  He  loved  Isolt  and  wanted  to  marry her. He asked her again and again. She did not like him, but he did not listen to her. One day there was a big fight between the great men and knights in the country. A lot of  people  watched  these  fights.  The  knights  were  on  the  horses,  with  swords  in  their  hands. Sir Palamides wanted to fight. He had a black helmet and black clothes, and he sat on a  black  horse.  Tristram  had  a  white  helmet,  white  clothes  and  a  white  horse.  The  two  knights  began  to  fight.  Sir  Tristram  moved  quickly  and  hit  Sir  Palamides  with  his  sword.  The black knight fell off his horse onto the ground. Then Tristram stood over him with his sword. ‘Leave here! Do not speak to Isolt again - or I will kill you!’ he cried. After the fight, Sir Tristram went back to Cornwall. He told his uncle about Isolt. ‘So Isolt is beautiful and kind? I can marry Isolt, and then the King of Ireland and I will be friends. It will be good for our two countries,’ King Mark said. ‘Ask the King of Ireland for me.’ So Tristram went back to Ireland. ‘King Mark wants to marry. Will you give him your lovely daughter, Isolt? He is a good man and he will love her,’ Tristram said to the King of Ireland. ‘Yes,  it  will  be  a  good  thing  for  this  country  and  for  Cornwall,’  answered  the  King  of  Ireland. And he sent Isolt to King Mark. Tristram took Isolt on his ship. He played beautiful songs on his harp for her. Tristram loved Isolt and she loved him. ‘I cannot marry you because you are going to marry King Mark. But he is a good man and  he  will  love  you  well,’  said  Tristram.  After  many  days  at  sea, the  ship  came  to  Cornwall. ‘I have to leave you now, dear Isolt,’ Tristram said sadly. ‘I am going away to Camelot. I want to be a Knight of the Round Table. I will fight for King Arthur. But please remember this - I am your friend and I will always love you. When you want my help, I will come.’ So  Isolt  married  King  Mark,  and  he  gave  her many  lovely  things.  But  one  day  Sir  Palamides suddenly arrived and carried Isolt away on his horse. Another  knight  went  after  him,  and  Sir  Palamides  fought  him.  Isolt  ran  away.  She  ran  and ran through the wood. ‘Night  is  coming,’  thought  Isolt.  ‘Nobody  will  find  me  here  in  the  dark  wood.’  She  sat  down and cried. Then she saw a lake. ‘I will jump into the water and die! Then thatevil Sir Palamides cannot hurt me or take me away.’ Isolt stood by the lake and looked into the cold water. She  heard  the  sound  of  a  horse  and  turned  round.  It  was  not  Sir  Palamides.  It  was  another knight. ‘Who are you?’ asked Isolt. She was afraid. ‘I am Sir Atherp,’ answered the knight. ‘Why are you here in the wood at night. Queen Isolt? Do not be afraid. I will not hurt you. I hope I can help you.’ ‘I ran away from Sir Palamides. He wants to take me away! Oh, please help me!’ ‘It is dangerous for you here,’ Sir Atherp said. ‘Come with me to my castle.’ Later that night, Sir Palamides arrived at the castle of Sir Atherp. ‘Open the doors!’ he shouted,but nobody answered. Sir Tristram was on his way to Camelot when a man ran to him. ‘Sir Palamides took Isolt away,’ he said. Tristram was very angry. He went back to Cornwall quickly and looked for Isolt. He saw a knight on the ground in a wood. ‘Sir Palamides wounded me in a fight,’ said the man. Tristram gave the brave knight a drink of water. ‘Where did Isolt go?’ Sir Tristram asked the knight. ‘I do not know,’ answered the knight. ‘She ran away when she saw the fight.’ ‘I have to find her,’ said Sir Tristram, and he jumped back on his horse. He came to a lake and looked at the ground. ‘Isolt was here,’ he thought. ‘And another person on a horse. I will follow them!’ After a short time he came to a castle. Outside the castle was Sir Palamides. Sir Palamides saw Sir Tristramand fought him. But Sir Tristram was stronger. Tristram threw Palamides off his horse and the evil knight fell onto the ground. Sir Palamides stood up and pulled his sword out of its scabbard. Then Tristram got off his horse and took out his sword. The two men fought there in front of the castle. Isolt was inside the castle. She heard the noise of the fight, and looked down from her window. ‘Tristram is here!’ she cried. ‘He will help me!’ She watched the fight. Palamides fell again and Tristram stood over him with his sword. ‘No,’  shouted  Isolt  loudly.  ‘Do  not  kill  him!‘  Sir  Atherp’s  men  opened  the  castle  doors  and  Isolt  ran  outside.  ‘Please  do  not  kill  him,  kind  Sir  Tristram.  He  fought  bravely.  Send  him to King Arthur and he will learn to be a good knight. Then he can fight for the King. ‘I will do this for you,’ answered Tristram. So Sir Palamides went to Camelot and learned to be a very good knight. Sir  Tristram  took  Isolt  to  King  Mark,  and  he  stayed  in  Cornwall  with  them.  But  the  King  began to be afraid of him. ‘Sir  Tristram  is  young  and  brave,’  he  thought.  ‘He  fought  Sir  Palamides  for  my  queen,  Isolt. Perhaps now she will love Tristram, and will not love me.’ One  day  Tristram  went  with  Isolt  to  the  beach.  King  Mark  followed  them  there  and  watched  them.  Tristram  played  a  beautiful  song  for  Isolt  on  his  harp.  She  listened  with  a  smile on her face. Suddenly King Mark came with his sword. ‘Why are you singing love songs to my wife?’ he shouted. ‘I am going to kill you for this!’ Tristram  had  no  sword  and  could  not  stop  King Mark.  The  King  wounded  Tristram  very  badly and he fell at Isolt’s feet and died. Day  after  day,  Isolt  sat  and  looked  at  the  sea.She  did  not  eat  or  drink.  She  did  not  speak to anybody again. She cried because Tristram was dead. Then she died too. When King Arthur heard the story of Tristram and Isolt, he was very sorry. Tristram was a brave  Knight  of  the  Round  Table.  Arthur  was  very  angry  with  King  Mark,  so  he  sent  another knight to Cornwall. That knight killed him.




King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table were in Camelot. One day an old man with white hair and in white clothes came to the King. ‘My King, I am bringing you a young knight. He is the son of a great man and he will do great things.’ The  King  saw  a  young  man.  He  wore  red  clothes  and  a  red  helmet  and  his  face  was  very beautiful. For  a  long  time  there  was  one  place  at  the  Round  Table  without  a  knight  at  it.  Years  before,  Merlin  said,  ‘Only  a  good  knight,  your  best  knight,  will  sit  there.  The  place  is  for  your best knight, and he will come to it.’ This was the only place with no name on it. The old man took the young knight to that place at the Round Table. There was a name there for the first time. It said, in gold letters: SIR GALAHAD. ‘Sit  here,’  said  the  old  man.  Then  he  left  King  Arthur  and  the  Knights  of  the  Round  Table and nobody saw him again. ‘Who is this young man? Why is he sitting there? Why is he not afraid?’ asked the King. ‘Does anybody know him?’ ‘I know him,’ said Sir Lancelot. ‘When I was on a journey, a nun came outside with this young  man.  She  brought  him  to  me  and  said,  “His  name  is  Galahad.  He  has  to  be  a  knight. It is very important.” Then she took him inside again.’ The  other  knights  looked  at  Galahad  and  they  looked  at  Sir  Lancelot.  Their  two  faces  were nearly the same. ‘Sir Lancelot married when he was very young,’ remembered one of the knights. ‘This is Sir Lancelots son.’ Sir Lancelot smiled at his son but said nothing. King  Arthur  made  Galahad  a knight  and  they  all  sat down  at  the  Round  Table.Suddenly they heard a loud noise. Then there was a great white light.They looked up and saw a gold cup above the table. What was it? Where did it come from? And then suddenly it was not there! Nobody spoke. Then Sir Galahad said, ’That is the Grail,* and it is in this country! I will go out and look for it. I will come back when I find it.’‘We will go with you,’ said Sir Lancelot, Sir Cors and Sir Percivale.King  Arthur  was  very  sad.  He  looked  round  the  Round  Table  at  his  knights.  Then  he spoke to them. ‘We  were  brothers,  but  this will be the end of our Round Table.  You  are  leaving  and  I will not see you again.’ The four knights got on their horses and left Camelot. For many years they looked for the Grail but they found nothing.Other knights also left and looked for the Grail. Nobody found it and some knights never came  back  to  Camelot.  The  Round  Table  was  different  now,  and  King  Arthur  was  very sad.After many years Sir Galahad, Sir Percivale and Sir Bors came to a place near the sea. They looked down and saw a ship. It was evening, but white light shone from the ship. ‘I know that we are going to find the Grail,’ said Sir Galahad. They  went  down  to  the  sea  and  onto  the  ship. There,  on  a  table,  was  the  Grail.  They were all very excited. ‘Look!‘ cried Sir Galahad. ‘Here is the Grail! Now we can end our journey.’ The knights were all very tired and they fell asleep. The ship went out to sea. The next morning, when the knights woke up, they were near a great city.‘We have to take the Grail into the city,’ said Sir Galahad. So they took the Grail and left the ship. There was no king in that country, because the dead king had no son. The great men sat in the castle and thought about the problem. When King Arthur’s knights arrived at the castle with the Grail, everybody was excited. Then  an  old  man  came  into  the  castle.  He  had white  clothes  and  white  hair.  The  knights knew him when they saw him. ‘These three knights are here at the end of a long journey,’ said the old man, ‘and they have the Grail. Take the youngest knight, a very brave man,and make him your king. Then the old man left. Nobody saw him come and nobody saw him go. So Sir Galahad was now the new king. ‘I  found  the  Grail  and  I  am  happy  now,’  Sir  Galahad  said.  He built  a  beautiful  church and put the Grail in it. Then the old man came to him again. ‘Your work is done. Now you are going to die,’ he said. Sir  Galahad  was  not  afraid.  In  the  morning  they  found  him  dead  in front  of  the  Grail. And his face was very happy. Sir Bors went back to Camelot. ‘We found the Grail and do not have to look for it now,’ he told King Arthur. Many other knights also came back and sat at the Round Table again. King Arthur was happy — but he was also sad. ‘I know that the end of the Round Table is coming. Many brave knights are dead. And no new knights will come and take their places,’ King Arthur said sadly.




One day, King Arthur and Sir Gawain, one of his best knights, went to France. Sir Lancelot was  in  France  at  the  time,  and  King  Arthur  was  angry  with  him. He  wanted  to  fight  him there. When  Arthur  was  away,  the  evil  knight  Sir  Mordred  came  to  Camelot.  He  wanted  to take Queen Guinevere away. ‘King  Arthur  is  dead! ’  he  told  the  Queen.  ‘He died  in  France  in  a  fight.  I  am  now  king, and you will be my queen.’‘I will die first!’ cried the Queen. Guinevere  ran  away  to  a  castle  in  London,  and  her  knights  went  with  her.  Mordred came to London with his men. But the walls of the castle were very strong, and he could not get inside. Then  one  of  Mordreds  men  came  to  him  and said,  ‘King  Arthur  is  coming  back  to England with his men and a lot of ships.’Mordred  went  to  Dover  with  his  men  and  waited  for  King  Arthur.  There  was  a  great fight, but Sir Mordred’s men could not win. They ran away. But  one  of  Sir  Mordred’s  men  wounded  Sir Gawain,  and  King  Arthur  found  the  brave knight on the ground. ‘I am dying. Give me a pen and paper. I want to write to Sir Lancelot.’He wrote: To Lancelot, I know that I am dying. You are my brother and I love you. Please come and help King Arthur in his fight with evil Sir Mordred. No knight is braver than you.Goodbye, my friend! Gawain And then he died. King Arthur was very sad because he loved Gawain very much. He sat on the ground next to the dead knight and cried all night.Sir Mordred found more men and they waited for Arthur at a place near a lake. King Arthur knew the place - Excalibur came from the same lake. On the night before the fight, Arthur saw Sir Gawain in his sleep. Gawain spoke to him.‘Do not fight Mordred now. In one month Lancelot will come with his men. He will help you and then the Queen can go back to Camelot.’ The King called his knights and told them about Sir Gawain.‘We will not fight today. I will go and speak with Mordred. Come with me and bring your swords.  But  leave  them  in  their  scabbards. Take  them  out  only  when  Mordred  or  his knights take out theirs. Then kill them!’King  Arthur  sent  a  man  to  Mordred.  The  man  told  him  about  Arthur’s  plan.  There  was no  fight  that  day.  Then  Arthur met  Mordred.  The  two  men  stood  and  talked.  The  King’s knights stood near the King, and Mordred’s knights stood near Mordred. Suddenly something jumped on the foot of one of Mordred’s knights. He pulled out his sword and killed the animal. The other knights saw his sword and took out their swords. ‘This is an unhappy day!‘ cried King Arthur and they began to fight. They fought all day. When evening came, King Arthur saw only two of his knights. Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere. His other knights were dead. Arthur cried when he saw his brave knights on the ground. Mordred stood with his sword and looked at his dead men on the ground. Then Arthur ran to Mordred and killed him. Mordred fell,but he wounded King Arthur with his sword. Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere took the King to a little church near the lake. But after they arrived, Sir Lucan also died of his wounds. The sky was dark and it was a cold night. Arthur felt very weak.‘I am also going to die now. It is time. Please take my sword, Excalibur. Go to the lake and throw it into the water,’ he told Sir Bedivere.Sir  Bedivere  took  the  sword  and  walked  to the  lake.  Then  he  looked  at  the  beautiful sword. Why do I have to throw this beautiful sword into the lake? That will not help King Arthur,’ he thought. So  he  put  Excalibur  under  a  big  stone,  and  went  back  to  the  King.  He  said,  ‘I  did  it.  I  threw your sword into the lake.’ ‘What did you see there?‘ the King asked. He was very cold and his wounds hurt him. ‘I saw the water, the sky and the stones. That is all.’ ‘Then  you  did  not  do  the  right  thing.  You  did  not  throw  the  sword  into  the  lake,’  King  Arthur said. ‘Go again, and throw Excalibur into the water. Then come to me again.’ Sir Bedivere went again to the lake and took the sword from under the stone. He looked again at the beautiful sword and thought, ‘I cannot throw this sword into the water. I want to have it. Then I will always remember King Arthur.’ So again he put the sword under a stone and again he went back to King Arthur. ‘I saw the water, the sky and the stones. Then the sword fell into the lake,’ he said. ‘Go again,’ the King said very sadly.‘Go quickly, because I am dying.’ ‘Oh my King! I am very sorry,’ said Bedivere. ‘I will do it now.’ He went back to the lake very quickly and got Excalibur. This time he threw it hard over the  water.  An  arm  came  up  out  of  the  water  and  caught  the  sword.  Then  the  arm  took  it  down into the lake. Sir Bedivere went back and told the King about the arm. ‘Now,’ said King Arthur, ‘take me to the lake quickly.’ Sir Bedivere carried the King to the lake. There was a long black boat on the water and some ladies in black dresses were in the boat. The Lady of the Lake and Queen Morgan le Fay were two of the ladies. He  looked  at  their  faces  and thought,  ‘I  know  these  faces.  I  knew  these  ladies  when  they lived. Now they are dead,but I remember them.’ ‘Please put me on the boat now,’ said King Arthur. So Sir Bedivere put him on the boat and the ladies stood round him. ‘I am leaving you now, and I want you to tell the story of King Arthur and the Knights of the  Round  Table.  I  will  come  again  one  day  when  my  country  asks  for  me,’  called  King  Arthur to Sir Bedivere from the boat. Those  were  the  King’s  last  words.  The  boat went  out  across  the  water.  Sir  Bedivere  stood and cried. And  that  is  the  end  of  the  story  of  King  Arthur  and  his  brave  Knights  of  the  Round  Table.
