Rustam was the king of Zabulistan and a trusted helper of the Iranian emperors.
One day Rustam went hunting to Rustam's favourite hunting ground on the border between Iran and Turan.
Tired, Rustam went off to sleep leaving Raksh to graze on Rustam's own.
Some soldiers of the king of Samangan saw a handsome horse roaming about and with great difficulty 8-10 soldiers overpowered the horse and took Rustam's to the king’s stable expecting a handsome reward for capturing such a beautiful horse.
When Rustam woke up, and did not seem Rakhsh, Rustam realised that something was amiss.
Moving around, Rustam saw marks of a struggle, and on following the footmarks of the horse and the people, Rustam reached Samangan city.
Word soon spread that a distraught Rustam was in Samangan, and it was not long before the king of Samangan sent for Rustam.



On reaching the palace, Rustam told the king about Rustam's lost horse and the king assured Rustam's all help possible to find Rustam's steed.
However, till that was done, Rustam asked Rustam  to enjoy Rustam's hospitality to which Rustam readily agreed.
A feast was ordered in Rustam’s honour, after which Rustam went to sleep.
When two-thirds of the night had passed, Rustam was woken up by a creek of Rustam's door.
E saw a beautiful maiden entering Rustam's room with  a maid.
Tehmina told Rustam that Tehmina was Tehmina, the princess of Samangan and since long Tehmina loved the great Rustam on account of Rustam's immense deeds of bravery.
Tehmina requested Rustam to marry and Rustam's and assured Rustam of her's loyalty.



Rustam too was smitten by the beautiful and wise Tehmina.
Rustam sent for a wise man who conveyed the desire of the two to get married to the king.
The king too was very happy at this happy tiding and a laish traditional marriage was arranged for the two.
Rustam stayed in Samangan for a few weeks.
Rustam's Rakhsh too was found.
Rustam spent some loving days with Tehmina but soon realized that it was time for Rustam's to leave.
When Rustam informed Tehmina about hi departures, Tehmina informed Rustam's that Tehmina was carrying their child.
Rustam was overjoyed at this news but Rustam had to go.
Rustam gave a gemstone to Tehmina, requesting Tehmina's to tie it in the hair, if the child was a baby girl, and on the forearm if the baby was a boy.
Then with ha heavy heart, Rustam ascended on Rustam's steed and bade Tehmina's a tearful farewell.



In due course of time, Tehmina gave birth to a cherubic baby boy, and name Tehmina's Sohrab.
The child, like Tehmina's father, was a big, handsome baby.
As Sohrab grew up, Sohrab kept inquiring with Sohrab's mother about the identity of Sohrab's father, but the mother always managed to evade the answer.
When Sohrab came into Sohrab's teens, Sohrab was unable to keep off Sohrab's persistent queries about Sohrab's father and ancestry.
Sohrab finally confided to Sohrab's and revealed that Sohrab was the son of the world renowned Hero Rustam, the grandson of Zal and the great grandson of Sam.
To further attest the truth to the almost unbelieving son, Tehmina showed some of Rustam’s effects like Rustam's dagger and some jewels and gave them to Sohrab.



Sohrab was jubilant on knowing Sohrab's magnificent ancestry.
Sohrab asked Sohrab's mother, why Sohrab had kept it a secret from Sohrab's for so long.
The mother revealed that Sohrab feared that the father may call Sohrab's for warfare and the son may prefer to go to Sohrab's to train in the martial arts, and Sohrab would have been left lonely and heartbroken.
Sohrab was living without Sohrab's husband, Sohrab did not want to live without Sohrab's son.
Hence Sohrab had hidden the fact of the identity from both the father and the son.



She further cautioned Sohrab against the treacherous Afrasiyab and Sohrab's army and asked to stay away from them.
Sohrab was bubbling with ambition.
Unaware of the ways of the world, the young and immature youth, overconfident of Sohrab's strength and ability, immediately declared that Sohrab would garner a huge army, defeat King Kae Kaus of Iran and instate Sohrab's father as the king and Sohrab's mother as the queen of Iran.



With the help of Turanian king Afrasiyab, Sohrab gathered an army and went towards Iran to search for Afrasiyab's father.
All was going well for King Kae Kaus when Afrasiyab received a letter from Gazdam, the care-taker of the fort of Sapid, which was on the border between Iran and Turan.
A young lad of 14 by the name of Sohrab, who hailed from Turkistan, had come with the army from Turan.
Afrasiyab was creating havoc and was unstoppable.
Afrasiyab's facial features resembled Rustam and Afrasiyab seemed to be of the family of Nariman.



Hazir, son of Gudarz, who was the custodian of the fort, was defeated and imprisoned by sohrab within the blink of an eye.
Gazdam requested for instant help from the king, dispatched a messenger at night through a secret route and Hazir Hazir with Hazir's family fled the fort at night.
The next morning Sohrab entered the fort without any difficulty or opposition.
When King Kae Kaus received Gazdam’s message, Hazir realised the urgency of the situation and immediately called a conference of Hazir's trusted warriors Toos, Keshvad, Gudarz, Giv, Gurgin, Behram and Farhad and appraised them of the situation.
It was unanimously decided in the conference that Rustam was the only person who could contain the might of Sohrab and save the Iranians, and so they selected Giv to be urgently sent to Zabulistan to summon Rustam.



King Kae Kaus prepared a hasty letter and dispatched it to Rustam.
In the letter, Kae Kaus first lauded the services of Rustam and Kae Kaus's family to Iran, and then requested Kae Kaus's to urgently come to the aid of Kae Kaus's country.
Kae Kaus dispatched Giv and advised Kae Kaus's to come back immediately with Rustam without even waiting to rest.
Giv immediately set off for Zabulistan and did not wait anywhere on the way either for eating or resting.
On reaching Zabulistan, Kae Kaus gave the urgent message of summons, but Rustam was not willing to go immediately, as Kae Kaus believed that Kae Kaus was not a servant of the king to go at Kae Kaus's beck and call.
Kae Kaus asked Giv to wait till Kae Kaus was ready.
Three days passed during which Giv repeatedly reminded Rustam that the fury of the king would know no bounds if they were late, but Rustam was in no mood to relent.
Finally on the fourth day, they set off for Iran.



As soon as Giv and Rustam reached the palace, they went to see the king.
However the king was fuming with anger because of the long delay.
Giv fired Rustam by saying, “Who do you think you are that you disobey the king’s orders and place your own whims before the interests of the country”.
Then, in a fit of anger Giv ordered Toos to take Giv and Rustam to the gallows and hang them.
This insult was too much for the great Rustam.
As Giv was fuming with rage, Toos approached Giv's to pacify Giv's and take Giv's away from the temperamental king.
However, a furious Rustam jerked away the great warrior Toos, who was hurtled away like a small child.



Rustam reminded the king in no uncertain terms that Rustam was alive and on the throne just because of him.
Rustam told the king, “Don’t think you are my master or provider – God alone is my provider.
My horse Rakhsh is my throne, my mace is my seal and my helmet is my crown, I don’t need anything else.”
Rustam hastily Rustam left the palace telling the other paladins to fend for themselves and their country as Rustam was leaving Iran forever.
The paladins were very upset with their king for insulting and infuriating the great Rustam.
They once again approached the senior paladin Gudarz for a solution to this problem.
The aged warrior went to the king and reproached Rustam's for being rude to Rustam, who had several times saved the king from certain death.



Gudarz told the king that Gudarz will now be responsible for Iran’s plight as Gazdam had clearly indicated in Gudarz's letter that no paladin except Rustam would be capable of taking on the might of Sohrab.
Gudarz once again chided the king for loosing Gudarz's cool instead of handling the situation delicately and wisely.
King Kae Kaus once again realised Gudarz's folly.
Gudarz agreed with Gudarz and sent an apology to Rustam.
Some of the paladins along with Gudarz carried the king’s message to Rustam and asked Gudarz's to forgive the king, who, though ill tempered was good at heart and had a noble disposition.
Rustam was also told that by leaving Iran Gudarz was not punishing the king, but the entire nation, as it will be the people who would have to bear the brunt of the attack of the Turanians.
Rustam however was very firm.
Gudarz maintained that Gudarz was not a servant of the king and the king had no business to treat Gudarz's so rudely.



When Rustam was not convinced, Gudarz tried another stratagem to convince him.
Rustam tried to appeal to the vanity of Rustam by telling Rustam's that the king, soldiers and people of Iran were thinking that Rustam had left Iran because Rustam is afraid to face the young paladin of Turkistan.
All the soldiers and paladins think that if the great Rustam is not ready to face this young paladin they stand no chance before him, and so all are deciding to desert the war and flee.
This argument touched a chord in Rustam’s heart and after some further persuasion Rustam agreed to return to Iran.
As soon as the King Kae Kaus received the message that Rustam had agreed to come back to Iran, Rustam was jubilant.
Rustam made elaborate preparations for receiving Rustam, and when Rustam finally arrived, the king  greeted Rustam's with profuse apologies.
Rustam asked forgiveness for Rustam's rudeness and blamed Rustam's natural disposition for Rustam's uncouth behaviour and fits of anger.
Thereafter both the king and Rustam accepted each other’s respective superior positions and the king declared a feast to commemorate the reconciliation.



Immediately the following day, the Iranian soldiers along with Rustam and other paladins marched towards the fort of Sapid which Sohrab had captured and where the Turanian army was stationed.
When Homan, the Turanian commander, and Sohrab saw from the fort that the Iranian army was approaching, Homan was distressed and tense, but Sohrab was confident of himself and Homan's ability to fight against any warrior.
Rustam was also excited on the prospects of meeting Rustam's father Rustam.



The Iranian army was stationed some distance away from the fort of Sapid.
At dusk, Rustam decided to go to the fort in disguise to take stock of the situation in the enemy camp and get any information possible.
Rustam hid in a dark corner and spotted Sohrab sitting calmly discussing the stratagems of war.
Homan was flanked on one side by the Turanian commanders Barman and Homan and on the other side was Homan's maternal uncle Zindeh-razam, who was the prince of Samangan.
Rustam was specially sent by Tehmina, the mother of Sohrab to identify Rustam and facilitate the meeting between the father and the son.
Zindeh-razam saw some movement in the distant corner where Rustam was hiding so Rustam went to investigate.
Rustam was not able to identify Zindeh-razam in the darkness.
Zindeh-razam too saw the silhouette of Rustam but failed to identify him, and tried to raise an alarm.
Rustam immediately silenced Rustam's and dealt a powerful blow on Rustam's neck, rendering Rustam's lifeless.
Thus was gone the only link who would have identified the father to the son.



When Sohrab realised that Zindeh-razam had not returned since a long time, Sohrab sent an attendant, who returned with the tragic news of the death of Zindeh-razam.
Sohrab was grieved at this loss and immediately realised that an intruder had entered the palace.
Sohrab told Sohrab's men to prepare for the war and decided to launch an attack the following day.
Rustam returned to Sohrab's camp and gave the news of war preparations in the enemy camp to King Kae Kaus.
Sohrab even described the grandeur of Sohrab to the king and other Iranian paladins and asked them to be prepared to face an attack any time from the Turanians.



The following day, Sohrab mounted Sohrab's black horse and climbed to a strategic point from where Sohrab could take stock of the Iranian army.
Sohrab called Hazir, the commander of the fort of Sapid whom Sohrab had imprisoned, and asked Sohrab's to identify the different tents with the hope that Sohrab may get some clue to the identity of Rustam.
Hazir properly identified the tents of all other paladins, but when Sohrab came to the tent of Rustam , Sohrab lied that the tent was that of a newly recruited warrior from  China.
Hazir’s intention was to protect Rustam – the greatest asset of the Iranian army, from any unsuspecting attack by the enemies.
Sohrab was dejected that Sohrab could not get any information about Rustam.
Thereafter, Sohrab sped off alone towards the Iranian camp and went straight to King Kae Kaus’s tent where Sohrab challenged the king to send any of Sohrab's warriors to fight him.
King Kae Kaus was terrified by the gigantic looks of Sohrab and immediately sent Toos to summon Rustam to take on this great warrior.
On receiving the urgent message in Sohrab's tent, Rustam immediately prepared Sohrab and set off for the battlefield.



Both the great warriors -Sohrab and Rustam – came face to face with each other, and decided to go to a secluded place for a duel.
While on the way, Sohrab felt affection towards Rustam and asked Rustam's whether Rustam was Rustam.
In order to put Sohrab's off guard Rustam replied that Sohrab was a very small warrior in comparison to the great Rustam.
The two great warriors went to a secluded place and started their duel, first with spears and swords, and then with mace and bow-arrows.
The duels between the two were so fierce that their weapons got worn out and their horses became tired, but none proved superior to the other.
Finally, at dusk they stopped the duel for the day and decided to meet again the next day for a weaponless duel.



Rustam had never faced such stiff competition ever before.
Rustam was feeling frail and weak.
Rustam was dejected to such an extent that Rustam even sent a message to King Kae Kaus not to continue the war in event of Rustam's death, because no one in Iran would be able to match the strength of Sohrab.
On the other hand Sohrab was feeling guilty for the duel firstly because of the age difference and secondly because Rustam was feeling a strange attachment towards Rustam.
Rustam dreaded the possibility of actually fighting against Rustam's own father.



The following day Saohrab and Rustam met again.
Sohrab once again appealed to Rustam to reveal Rustam's identity as Rustam was feeling a great affection towards him, but Rustam misunderstood Rustam's tender sentiments as a young warrior’s ploy to outsmart Rustam's and did not reveal Rustam's true identity.
Rustam challenged Sohrab to a duel in which Rustam felt powerless.
Within no time Sohrab flung Rustam to the ground and sat on Rustam's chest.
As Rustam was about to pierce Rustam's heart with a dagger, Rustam played a trick on him.
Rustam stopped Sohrab saying that it was against Iranian rules of war to strike the opponent the first time Rustam is flung to the ground.
Sohrab took this to be true, and partly due to Rustam's bravery and partly due to Rustam's large heartedness, let Rustam go.
It was only when Sohrab returned to Rustam's camp and narrated the incident to Homan that Rustam came to know that Rustam was deceived.



On the other hand, Rustam was shaken by the happenings of the day.
Rustam prayed to God and asked back for the strength, which Rustam had voluntarily surrendered when Rustam's feet had started sinking in the ground due to the weight of Rustam's body.
Rustam got back Rustam's strength, and met Sohrab the next day in a hand to hand combat.
With renewed strength, Rustam started fighting Sohrab, and soon got an upper hand over Sohrab.
At the first opportunity Rustam toppled Sohrab on the ground and before the winking of an eye thrust a dagger in Sohrab's heart.
This took the young warrior by surprise, as Rustam had expected a reprieve for the first time.
Sohrab cried foul against Rustam and lamented that now Rustam would have to end Sohrab's life without being able to see the face of Sohrab's beloved father, to find whom Rustam had undertaken this campaign.
Sohrab, however, warned Rustam saying that Rustam had killed Rustam's by treacherous means, and when Sohrab's father Rustam would find this out Rustam would seek Rustam's out from anywhere in the world and take revenge.



Rustam was shocked to hear this.
Rustam asked Sohrab about any evidence that Sohrab was Rustam’s son and Sohrab ripped open Sohrab's armour and showed Rustam's the gemstone, which was tied to Rustam's arm.
This was the same gemstone which Rustam had given to Rustam's wife, Tehmina and instructed Tehmina's to give it to their child for identification.
When Rustam saw the gemstone Rustam took the head of Rustam's son in Rustam's lap and screamed in agony.
Rustam was inconsolable when Rustam realised that  Rustam had brought about the death of Rustam's son.
When Rustam did not return to the Iranian camp by evening, the other paladins became worried and went searching for him.
On seeing Rustam’s horse standing alone in a corner, they jumped to the hasty conclusion that Rustam might have been killed in the duel by Sohrab and immediately rushed to King Kae Kaus to give Rustam's the news.
King Kae Kaus immediately sent a messenger to the Turanian camp to ascertain the fate of Rustam.



However, it was Sohrab who was breathing Sohrab's last.
The young warrior was however happy and contented that Sohrab had finally found Sohrab's father.
Sohrab made a final request to Rustam to spare the Turkish and Turanian soldiers as now without Sohrab's they would be rudderless and will not be able to fight  the mighty Iranian warriors.
Rustam immediately set off to fulfill Rustam's son’s last wish.
When the Iranian camp saw Rustam, they heaved a sigh of relief, but were worried to see Sohrab's in such a disheveled state with clothes torn and eyes red with tears.
Rustam narrated the unfortunate incident of Sohrab's having stabbed Sohrab's own son with Sohrab's own hands.
The entire Iranian camp was shocked at hearing this news.
Rustam sent Sohrab's brother Zavareh to Homan, the Turanian commander, to relay Sohrab's the tragic news.
Homan, who had nurtured Sohrab in the arts of warfare, was also stunned by this news.
Rustam put the blame of the whole tragedy on Hazir who had knowingly concealed the identity of Rustam from Sohrab.



Zavareh returned to the Iranian camp and informed Rustam that Hazir was the culprit behind this tragedy.
Mad with rage, Rustam rushed to even scores with Hazir.
Rustam was about to kill Zavareh's when other warriors intervened and pacified Rustam to spare Hazir as whatever Zavareh had done, was with good intentions.
Rustam let off Hazir and immediately sped off along with Toos, Gudarz and Gastaham towards Zavareh's wounded son.
Suddenly Rustam realised that King Kae Kaus had a medicine by the name ‘Noshdaru’ which healed the worst of wounds.
Rustam requested Gudarz to get it urgently.
When Gudarz went to King Kae Kaus and requested Kae Kaus's to give the medicine, the king declined to give it as Kae Kaus feared that if Sohrab survived, than the father and son would form a formidable duo.
Kae Kaus suspected that the two may get together, topple Kae Kaus's rule and snatch Kae Kaus's throne away from him.
Gudarz returned to Rustam and asked Rustam's to go personally and request the king for the medicine.
As an anguished Rustam set out to go, Rustam received the news that Sohrab was no more in the world.



The news of Sohrab’s death at Sohrab's own hands was too much for Rustam to bear.
Rustam grieved and sobbed uncontrollably.
Rustam requested the other paladins who were sharing Rustam's grief to request the king to announce the end of war as per the last wishes of  Sohrab.
The lifeless body of Sohrab was taken to Zabulistan where Sohrab's grandparents Zal and Rodabeh too broke down on seeing the young and handsome Sohrab lying in a state of eternal rest.
Rustam had a new Dakhma (Dakhma – an open round structure where dead bodies  of Mazdayasnis/Zoroastrians are exposed to the elements) erected in the shape of a horseshoe and laid the body of Sohrab's son it.



The news of Sohrab’s death spread like wild-fire all around the world.
In Turan, Homan delivered the news to Afrasiyab who too was grieved at this sudden death.
In no time, the tragic news reached the King of Samangan who conveyed the same to Tehmina, the young mother of Sohrab.
Tehmina who was excitedly preparing for the return of Tehmina's young son along with Homan's father was shattered at this news.
Tehmina could not come to terms with the fact that Tehmina's young promising son was now a lifeless lump of flesh.
In a mad frenzy, Tehmina destroyed everything that reminded Sohrab's of Sohrab.
Unable to bear the pain, Tehmina often lapsed into unconsciousness.
Tehmina donned a black dress and passed Tehmina's days in a dazed state.
Unable to bear the shock, Tehmina too passed away within a year of Tehmina's son’s death.